The following is a conversation with Daniel Kahneman,
winner of the Nobel Prize in Economics for his integration of economic science
with the psychology of human behavior, judgment, and decision making.
He's the author of the popular book, Thinking Fast and Slow, that summarizes in an accessible way
his research of several decades, often in collaboration with Amos Tversky,
on cognitive biases, prospect theory, and happiness.
The central thesis of this work is the dichotomy between two modes of thought,
what he calls System 1 is fast, instinctive, and emotional. System 2 is slower, more deliberative,
and more logical. The book delineates cognitive biases associated with each of these two types
of thinking. His study of the human mind and its peculiar and fascinating limitations
are both instructive and inspiring for those of us seeking to engineer intelligence systems.
This is the Artificial Intelligence Podcast. If you enjoy it, subscribe on YouTube,
give it 5 stars on Apple Podcast, follow on Spotify, support it on Patreon,
or simply connect with me on Twitter. Alex Friedman, spelled F R I D M A N.
I recently started doing ads at the end of the introduction. I'll do one or two minutes
after introducing the episode and never any ads in the middle that can break the flow of the
conversation. I hope that works for you and doesn't hurt the listening experience.
This show is presented by Cash App, the number one finance app in the App Store.
I personally use Cash App to send money to friends, but you can also use it to buy,
sell, and deposit Bitcoin in just seconds. Cash App also has a new investing feature.
You can buy fractions of a stock, say $1 worth, no matter what the stock price is.
Roker's services are provided by Cash App Investing, a subsidiary of Square and member SIPC.
I'm excited to be working with Cash App to support one of my favorite organizations called First,
best known for their first robotics and Lego competitions. They educate and inspire hundreds
of thousands of students in over 110 countries and have a perfect rating and charity navigator,
which means the donated money is used to maximum effectiveness.
When you get Cash App from the App Store, Google Play, and use code lexpodcast,
you'll get $10 and Cash App will also donate $10 to First, which again is an organization that
I've personally seen inspire girls and boys the dream of engineering a better world.
And now here's my conversation with Daniel Kahneman.
You tell a story of an SS soldier early in the war, World War II,
in a Nazi occupied France in Paris, where you grew up. He picked you up and hugged you
and showed you a picture of a boy, maybe not realizing that you were Jewish.
Not maybe, certainly not.
So I told you I'm from the Soviet Union, that was significantly impacted by the war as well,
and I'm Jewish as well. What do you think World War II taught us about human psychology broadly?
Well, I think the only big surprise is the extermination policy genocide by the German people.
That's when you look back on it, and I think that's a major surprise.
It's a surprise because...
It's a surprise that they could do it. It's a surprise that enough people willingly participated
in that. This is a surprise. Now it's no longer a surprise, but it's changed
many people's views, I think, about human beings.
Certainly for me, the Achman trial teaches you something because it's very clear that
if it could happen in Germany, it could happen anywhere.
It's not that the Germans were special. This could happen anyway.
So what do you think that is? Do you think we're all capable of evil?
We're all capable of cruelty?
I don't think in those terms. I think that what is certainly possible is you can dehumanize people
so that you treat them not as people anymore, but as animals, and the same way that you can
slaughter animals without feeling much of anything, it can be the same.
When you feel that, I think the combination of dehumanizing the other side and having
uncontrolled power over other people, I think that doesn't bring out the most generous aspect
of human nature. So that Nazi soldier, he was a good man, and he was perfectly capable
of killing a lot of people, and I'm sure he did.
But what did the Jewish people mean to Nazis? So what the dismissal of Jewish as worthy of?
Again, this is surprising that it was so extreme, but it's not one thing in human
nature. I don't want to call it evil, but the distinction between the in group and the out
group, that is very basic. So that's built in. The loyalty and affection towards in group,
and the willingness to dehumanize the out group, that is in human nature.
That's what I think probably didn't need the Holocaust to teach us that, but the Holocaust
is a very sharp lesson of what can happen to people and what people can do.
So the effect of the in group and the out group?
It's clear that those were people. You could shoot them. They were not human. There was no
empathy or very, very little empathy left. So occasionally there might have been. And very
quickly, by the way, the empathy disappeared if there was initially. And the fact that everybody
around you was doing it, that completely the group doing it and everybody shooting Jews,
I think, that makes it permissible. Now, how much, you know, whether it could happen
in every culture or whether the Germans were just particularly efficient and disciplined,
so they could get away with it? It's an interesting question.
Are these artifacts of history or is it human nature?
I think that's really human nature. You know, you put some people in a position of power relative
to other people and then they become less human, they become different.
But in general, in war outside of concentration camps in World War II, it seems that war brings out
darker sides of human nature, but also the beautiful things about human nature.
Well, you know, I mean, what it brings out is the loyalty among soldiers. I mean,
it brings out the bonding, male bonding. I think it's a very real thing that happens.
And there is a certain thrill to friendship. And there is certainly a certain thrill to friendship
under risk and to shared risk. And so people have very profound emotions up to the point
where it gets so traumatic that little is left. So let's talk about psychology a little bit.
In your book, Thinking Fast and Slow, you describe two modes of thought system one,
the fast instinctive and emotional one, system two, the slower, deliberate, logical one,
at the risk of asking Darwin to discuss theory of evolution. Can you describe
distinguishing characteristics for people who have not read your book of the two systems?
Well, I mean, the word system is a bit misleading, but at the same time, it's misleading. It's also
very useful. But what I call system one, it's easier to think of it as, as a family of activities.
And primarily the way I describe it is, there are different ways for ideas to come to mind.
And some ideas come to mind automatically. And the example, a standard example is two plus two,
and then something happens to you. And, and in other cases, you've got to do something,
you've got to work in order to produce the idea. And my example, I always give the same pair of
numbers as 27 times 14, I think. You have to perform some algorithm in your head, some steps.
Yes. And, and it takes time. It's a very different, nothing comes to mind, except
something comes to mind, which is the algorithm, I mean, that you've got to perform. And then it's
work, and it engages short term memory and engages executive function. And it makes you incapable
of doing other things at the same time. So the, the main characteristic of system two,
that there is mental effort involved, and there is a limited capacity for mental effort,
where a system one is effortless, essentially, that's the major distinction. So you talk about
their, you know, it's really convenient to talk about two systems, but you also mentioned just
now, and in general, that there is no distinct two systems in the brain, from a neurobiological,
even from psychology perspective. But why does it seem to, from the experiments you've conducted,
there does seem to be kind of emergent two modes of thinking. So at some point, these kinds of
systems came into a brain architecture, maybe man will share it, but, or do you not think of it
at all in those terms that it's all a mush and these two things just emerge?
You know, evolutionary theorizing about this is cheap and easy. So it's the way I think about it
is that it's very clear that animals have a perceptual system, and that includes an ability
to understand the world, at least to the extent that they can predict, they can't explain anything,
but they can anticipate what's going to happen. And that's the key form of understanding the world.
And my crude idea is that, what I call system two, well, system two grew out of this. And,
you know, there is language, and there is the capacity of manipulating ideas, and the capacity
of imagining futures, and of imagining counterfactual things that haven't happened, and to do conditional
thinking, and there are really a lot of abilities that without language, and without the very large
brain that we have compared to others, would be impossible. Now, system one is more like what
the animals are, but system one also can talk. I mean, it has language, it understands language.
Indeed, it speaks for us. I mean, you know, I'm not choosing every word as a deliberate process.
The words, I have some idea, and then the words come out, and that's automatic and effortless.
And many of the experiments you've done is to show that, listen, system one exists and it does
speak for us, and we should be careful about the voice it provides. Well, I mean, you know,
we have to trust it, because it's the speed at which it acts. System two, if we dependent on
system two for survival, we wouldn't survive very long, because it's very slow. Yeah, crossing
the street. Crossing the street. I mean, many things depend on their being automatic. One very
important aspect of system one is that it's not instinctive. You use the word instinctive. It
contains skills that clearly have been learned so that skilled behavior like driving a car or
speaking, in fact, skilled behavior has to be learned. And so it doesn't, you know, you don't
come equipped with driving, you have to learn how to drive. And you have to go through a period
where driving is not automatic before it becomes automatic. So yeah, you construct. I mean, this
is where you talk about heuristic and biases is you to make it automatic. You create a pattern,
and then system one essentially matches a new experience against the previously seen pattern.
And when that match is not a good one, that's when the cognitive all the all the mess happens,
but it's most of the time it works. And so it's pretty, most of the time, the anticipation of
what's going to happen next is correct. And, and most of the time, the plan about what you have
to do is correct. And so most of the time, everything works just fine. What's interesting
actually is that in some sense, system one is much better at what it does than system two is at
what it does. That is, there is that quality of effortlessly solving enormously complicated
problems, which clearly exists. So that the chess player, a very good chess player,
all the moves that come to their mind are strong moves. So all the selection of strong moves
happens unconsciously and automatically and very, very fast. And, and all that is in system one.
So the system two verifies. So along this line of thinking, really what we are are machines that
construct pretty effective system one. You could think of it that way. So we're now talking about
humans. But if we think about building artificial intelligence systems, robots, do you think all
the features and bugs that you have highlighted in human beings are useful for constructing AI
systems? So both systems are useful for perhaps instilling in robots? What is happening these days
is that actually what is happening in deep learning is is more like a system one product
than like a system two product. I mean, deep learning matches patterns and anticipate what's
going to happen. So it's highly predictive. What, what deep learning doesn't have, and you know,
many people think that this is a critical, it, it doesn't have the ability to reason. So it,
it doesn't, there is no system two there. But I think very importantly, it doesn't have any
causality or any way to represent meaning and to represent real interaction. So until that is solved,
the, you know, what can be accomplished is marvelous and very exciting, but limited.
That's actually really nice to think of current advances in machine learning is essentially
system one advances. So how far can we get with just system one? If we think deep learning and
artificial systems, I mean, you know, it's very clear that deep mind is already gone way, way
beyond what people thought was possible. I think, I think the thing that has impressed me most about
the developments in AI is the speed. It's that things, at least in the context of deep learning,
and maybe this is about to slow down, but things moved a lot faster than anticipated.
The transition from solving, solving chess to solving go was, I mean, that's bewildering how
quickly it went. The move from AlphaGo to AlphaZero is sort of bewildering the speed at which they
accomplished that. Now clearly, there, there, so there are many problems that you can solve that
way, but there are some problems for which you need something else. Something like reasoning.
Well, reasoning and also, you know, one of the real mysteries, psychologist Gary Marcus was
also a critic of AI. I mean, he, what he points out, and I think he has a point is that humans
learn quickly. Children don't need a million examples. They need two or three examples. So
clearly there is a fundamental difference. And what enables, what enables a machine
to learn quickly, what you have to build into the machine because it's clear that you have to
build some expectations or something in the machine to make it ready to learn quickly. That's,
that at the moment seems to be unsolved. I'm pretty sure that DeepMind is working on it, but
yeah, they're, if they have solved it, I haven't heard yet.
They're trying to actually, them and OpenAI are trying to start to get to use neural networks
to reason. So assemble knowledge, of course, causality is temporal causality is out of reach
to most everybody. You mentioned the benefits of system one is essentially that it's fast,
allows us to function in the world. Fast and skilled, you know. It's skill. And it has a model
of the world, you know, in a sense, I mean, there was the early phase of AI attempted to model
reasoning. And they were moderately successful, but, you know, reasoning by itself doesn't get you
much. Deep learning has been much more successful in terms of, you know, what they can do. But now
that's an interesting question, whether it's approaching its limits. What do you think?
I think absolutely. So I just talked to John Lacoon, he mentioned, you know,
I know him. So he thinks that the limits, we're not going to hit the limits with neural networks,
that ultimately this kind of system one pattern matching will start to start to look like system
two without significant transformation of the architecture. So I'm more with the majority
of the people who think that, yes, neural networks will hit a limit in their capability.
He, on the one hand, I have heard him tell them is a service essentially that, you know, what
they have accomplished is not a big deal that they have just touched that basically, you know,
they can't do unsupervised learning in an effective way. But you're telling me that he thinks
that the current, within the current architecture, you can do causality and reasoning.
So he's very much a pragmatist in a sense of saying that we're very far away, that there's
still, I think there's this idea that he says is we can only see one or two mountain peaks ahead,
and there might be either a few more after or thousands more after. Yeah. So that kind of
idea. I heard that metaphor. Right. But nevertheless, it doesn't see a, the final answer not fundamentally
looking like one that we currently have. So neural networks being a huge part of that.
Yeah. I mean, that's very likely because pattern matching is so much of what's going on. And you
can think of neural networks as processing information sequentially. Yeah. I mean, you know,
there is, there is an important aspect to, for example, you get systems that translate and
they do a very good job, but they really don't know what they're talking about. And for that,
I'm really quite surprised. For that, you would need, you would need an AI that has sensation,
an AI that is in touch with the world. Yeah. And self awareness and maybe even something
resembles consciousness kind of ideas. Certainly awareness of, you know, awareness of what's going
on so that the words have meaning or can get are in touch with some perception or some action.
Yeah. So that's a big thing for Jan. And what he refers to is grounding to the physical space.
So that's what we're talking about the same thing. Yeah. So, but so how, how you ground,
I mean, the grounding without grounding, then you get, you get a machine that doesn't know
what it's talking about, because it is talking about the world ultimately.
The question, the open question is what it means to ground. I mean, we're very human centric in
our thinking, but what does it mean for a machine to understand what it means to be in this world?
Does it need to have a body? Does it need to have a finiteness like we humans have?
All of these elements, it's, it's a very, it's an open question.
You know, I'm not sure about having a body, but having a perceptual system, having a body would
be very helpful too. I mean, if, if you think about human mimicking human, but having a perception,
that seems to be essential so that you can build, you can accumulate knowledge about the world.
So if you can imagine a human completely paralyzed, and there's a lot that the human
brain could learn, you know, with a paralyzed body. So if we got a machine that could do that,
that would be a big deal. And then the flip side of that, something you see in children,
and something in machine learning world is called active learning. Maybe it is also,
is being able to play with the world. How important for developing system on or system
to, do you think it is to play with the world to be able to interact with?
Certainly a lot, a lot of what you learn as you learn to anticipate
the outcomes of your actions. I mean, you can see that how babies learn it,
you know, with their hands, how they, how they learn, you know, to connect,
you know, the movements of their hands with something that clearly is something that happens
in the brain. And, and, and the ability of the brain to learn new patterns. So, you know,
it's the kind of thing that you get with artificial limbs, that you connect it and
then people learn to operate the artificial limb, you know, really impressively quickly,
at least from, from what I hear. So we have a system that is ready to learn the world through
action. At the risk of going into way too mysterious of land, what do you think it takes
to build a system like that? Obviously, we're very far from understanding how the brain works, but
how difficult is it to build this mind of ours? You know, I mean, I think that Jan Lakun's answer,
that we don't know how many mountains there are. I think that's a very good answer.
I think that, you know, if you, if you look at what Ray Kurzweil is saying, that strikes me as
off the wall. But, but I think people are much more realistic than that, where actually Demi
Sasabi is, and Jan is, and so the people were actually doing the work fairly realistic, I think.
To maybe phrase it another way, from a perspective not of building it, but from understanding it.
How complicated are human beings in the, in the following sense? You know, I work with
autonomous vehicles and pedestrians. So we tried to model pedestrians. How difficult is it to model
a human being, their perception of the world, the two systems they operate under sufficiently
to be able to predict whether the pedestrian is going to cross the road or not? I'm, you know,
I'm fairly optimistic about that, actually, because what we're talking about is a huge
amount of information that every vehicle has, and that feeds into one system, into one gigantic
system. And so anything that any vehicle learns becomes part of what the whole system knows.
And with a system multiplier like that, there is a lot that you can do. So human beings are very
complicated, but and, and, you know, system is going to make mistakes, but human makes mistakes.
I think that they'll be able to, I think they are able to anticipate pedestrians, otherwise
a lot would happen. They're able to, you know, they're able to get into a roundabout and into,
into traffic. So they must know both to expect or to anticipate how people will react when
they're sneaking in. And there's a lot of learning that's involved in that.
Currently, the pedestrians are treated as things that cannot be hit, and they're not treated as
agents with whom you interact in a game theoretic way. So, I mean, it's not, it's a totally open
problem. And every time somebody tries to solve it, it seems to be harder than we think. And nobody's
really tried to seriously solve the problem of that dance, because I'm not sure if you've thought
about the problem of pedestrians, but you're really putting your life in the hands of the driver.
You know, there is a dance as part of the dance that would be quite complicated. But for example,
when I cross the street and there is a vehicle approaching, I look the driver in the eye. And
I think many people do that. And, you know, that's a signal that I'm sending. And I would be sending
that machine to an autonomous vehicle, and it had better understand it, because it means I'm crossing.
So, and there's another thing you do that actually, so I'll tell you what you do, because we watched,
I've watched hundreds of hours of video on this, is when you step in the street, you do that before
you step in the street. And when you step in the street, you actually look away.
Look away. Yeah. Now, what is that? What that's saying is, I mean, you're trusting that the car,
who hasn't slowed down yet, will slow down. Yeah. And you're telling him, yeah, I'm committed.
I mean, this is like in a game of tricking. So I'm committed. And if I'm committed,
I'm looking away. So there is, you just have to stop. So the question is whether a machine that
observes that needs to understand mortality. Here, I'm not sure that it's got to understand so much
it's got to anticipate. So, and here, but you know, you're surprising me because
here I would think that maybe you can anticipate without understanding, because I think this is
clearly what's happening in playing go or in playing chess. There's a lot of anticipation
and there is zero understanding. So I thought that you didn't need a model of the human.
And the model of the human mind to avoid hitting pedestrians. But you are suggesting that
you do. Yeah, you do. And then it's, then it's a lot harder. So this is, and I have a follow
question to see where your intuition lies. Is it seems that almost every robot human
collaboration system is a lot harder than people realize. So do you think it's possible for robots
and humans to collaborate successfully? We talked a little bit about semi autonomous vehicles,
like in the Tesla autopilot, but just in tasks in general. If you think we talked about current
neural networks being kind of system one, do you think those same systems can borrow humans for
system two type tasks and collaborate successfully? Well, I think that in any system
where humans and the machine interact, that the human will be superfluous within a fairly
short time. That is, if the machine has advanced enough so that it can really help the human,
then it may not need the human for a long time. Now, it would be very interesting if
there are problems that for some reason the machine doesn't cannot solve, but that people
could solve, then you would have to build into the machine and ability to recognize
that it is in that kind of problematic situation and to call the human. That cannot be easy
without understanding. That is, it must be very difficult to program a recognition that you are
in a problematic situation without understanding the problem. That is very true. In order to
understand the full scope of situations that are problematic, you almost need to be smart enough
to solve all those problems. It is not clear to me how much the machine will need the human.
I think the example of chess is very instructive. There was a time at which
Kasparov was saying that human machine combinations will beat everybody. Even stock fish doesn't
need people and alpha zero certainly doesn't need people. The question is, just like you said,
how many problems are like chess and how many problems are the ones where are not like chess?
Every problem probably in the end is like chess. The question is, how long is that transition
period? I mean, that's a question I would ask you in terms of an autonomous vehicle just
driving is probably a lot more complicated than go to solve that. Yes, and that's surprising
because it's open. No, I mean, that's not surprising to me because there is a hierarchical
aspect to this, which is recognizing a situation and then within the situation bringing up the
relevant knowledge. And for that hierarchical type of system to work, you need a more complicated
system than we currently have. A lot of people think because as human beings, this is probably
the cognitive biases, they think of driving as pretty simple because they think of their own
experience. This is actually a big problem for AI researchers or people thinking about AI because
they evaluate how hard a particular problem is based on very limited knowledge, basically on
how hard it is for them to do the task. And then they take for granted, maybe you can speak to
that because most people tell me driving is trivial and humans, in fact, are terrible at
driving is what people tell me. And I see humans and humans are actually incredible at driving
and driving is really terribly difficult. So is that just another element of the effects that
you've described in your work on the psychology side? No, I mean, I haven't really, you know,
I would say that my research has contributed nothing to understanding the ecology and to
understanding the structure situations and the complexity of problems. So all we know is very
clear that that goal, it's endlessly complicated, but it's very constrained. So and in the real
world, there are far fewer constraints and and many more potential surprises. So
so that's obvious because it's not always obvious to people, right? So when you think about,
well, I mean, you know, people thought that reasoning was hard and perceiving was easy. But
you know, they quickly learned that actually modeling vision was tremendously complicated
and modeling, even proving theorems was relatively straightforward.
To push back on that a little bit on the quickly part, they haven't took several decades to learn
that and most people still haven't learned that. I mean, our intuition, of course, AI researchers
have, but you drift a little bit outside the specific AI field, the intuition is still perceptible.
Yeah, that's true. I mean, intuitions, the intuitions of the public haven't changed
radically. And they are there, as you said, they're evaluating the complexity of problems
by how difficult it is for them to solve the problems. And that's not very little to do with
the complexities of solving them in AI. How do you think from the perspective of AI researcher,
do we deal with the intuitions of the public? So in trying to think, I mean, arguably,
the combination of hype investment and the public intuition is what led to the AI winters.
I'm sure that same could be applied to tech or that the intuition of the public leads to media
hype leads to companies investing in the tech, and then the tech doesn't make the company's money,
and then there's a crash. Is there a way to educate people sort of to fight the,
let's call it system one thinking? In general, no. I think that's the simple answer.
And it's going to take a long time before the understanding of where those systems can do
becomes public knowledge. And then the expectations, there are several aspects
that are going to be very complicated. The fact that you have a device that cannot explain itself
is a major, major difficulty. And we're already seeing that. I mean, this is really something
that is happening. So it's happening in the judicial system. So you have system that are clearly
better at predicting parole violations than judges, but they can't explain the reasoning.
And so people don't want to trust them. We seem to in system one even use cues
to make judgments about our environment. So this explainability point,
do you think humans can explain stuff? No, but I mean, there is a very interesting
aspect of that. Humans think they can explain themselves. So when you say something, and I
ask you why do you believe that, then reasons will occur to you. But actually, my own belief
is that in most cases, the reasons have very little to do with why you believe what you believe.
So that the reasons are a story that comes to your mind when you need to explain yourself.
But people traffic in those explanations. I mean, the human interaction depends on those shared
fictions and the stories that people tell themselves. You just made me actually realize,
and we'll talk about stories in a second, that not to be cynical about it, but perhaps
there's a whole movement of people trying to do explainable AI. And really, we don't necessarily
need to explain. AI doesn't need to explain itself. It just needs to tell a convincing story.
Yeah, absolutely. The story doesn't necessarily need to reflect the truth. It just needs to be
convincing. There's something to that. You can say exactly the same thing in a way that
sounds cynical or doesn't sound cynical. But the objective of having an explanation
is to tell a story that will be acceptable to people. And for it to be acceptable and to
be robustly acceptable, it has to have some elements of truth. But the objective is for
people to accept it. It's quite brilliant, actually. But so on the stories that we tell,
sorry to ask you the question that most people know the answer to, but you talk about two cells
in terms of how life has lived, the experienced self and the remembering self. Can you describe
the distinction between the two? Well, sure. I mean, there is an aspect of life that occasionally,
you know, most of the time we just live, and we have experiences and they're better and they are
worse and it goes on over time. And mostly we forget everything that happens, or we forget most
of what happens. Then occasionally, you, when something ends or at different points, you evaluate
the past and you form a memory. And the memory is schematic. It's not that you can roll a film
of an interaction, you constructs, in effect, the elements of a story about an episode.
So there is the experience and there is the story that is created about the experience. And that's
what I call the remembering. So I had the image of two cells. So there is a self that lives,
and there is a self that evaluates life. Now, the paradox and the deep paradox in that is that
we have one system or one self that does the living, but the other system, the remembering
self is all we get to keep. And basically, decision making and everything that we do
is governed by our memories, not by what actually happened. It's governed by the story that we
told ourselves or by the story that we're keeping. So that's the distinction.
I mean, there's a lot of brilliant ideas about the pursuit of happiness that come out of that.
What are the properties of happiness which emerge from the remembering self?
There are properties of how we construct stories that are really important. So
that I studied a few, but a couple are really very striking. And one is that in stories,
time doesn't matter. There's a sequence of events or there are highlights or not.
And how long it took, they lived happily ever after or three years later, something.
Time really doesn't matter. In stories, events matter, but time doesn't. That leads to a very
interesting set of problems because time is all we got to live. Time is the currency of life.
And yet, time is not represented basically in evaluated memories. So that creates a lot of
paradoxes that I've thought about. Yeah, they're fascinating. But if you were to
give advice on how one lives a happy life based on such properties, what's the optimal?
You know, I gave up. I abandoned happiness research because I couldn't solve that problem. I
couldn't see. And in the first place, it's very clear that if you do talk in terms of those two
selves, then what makes the remembering self happy and what makes the experiencing self happy
are different things. And I asked the question of, suppose you're planning a vacation and you're
just told that at the end of the vacation, you'll get an amnesic drug. So remember nothing. And
they'll also destroy all your photos. So there'll be nothing. Would you still go to the same vacation?
And it's, it turns out we go to vacations in large part to construct memories,
not to have experiences, but to construct memories. And it turns out that the vacation
that you would want for yourself if you knew you will not remember is probably not the same
vacation that you will want for yourself if you will remember. So I have no solution to these
problems, but clearly those are big issues. And you've talked about issues. You've talked about
sort of how many minutes or hours you spend about the vacation. It's an interesting way to think about
it because that's how you really experience the vacation outside the being in it. But there's
also a modern, I don't know if you think about this or interact with it. There's a modern way to
magnify the remembering self, which is by posting on Instagram, on Twitter, on social networks.
A lot of people live life for the picture that you take that you post somewhere. And now thousands
of people share and potentially potentially millions. And then you can relive it even much
more than just those minutes. Do you think about that magnification much? You know, I'm too old
for social networks. I, you know, I've never seen Instagram. So I cannot really speak
intelligently about those things. I'm just too old. But it's interesting to watch the
exact effects you described. I think it will make a very big difference. I mean, and it will make,
it will also make a difference. And that I don't know whether it's clear that in some ways
the devices that serve us supplant function. So you don't have to remember phone numbers.
You don't have, you really don't have to know facts. I mean, the number of conversations,
I mean, Bob with somebody says, well, let's look it up. So it's, in a way, it's made conversations.
Well, it's, it means that it's much less important to know things. No, it used to be very important
to know things. This is changing. So the requirements of that, that we have for ourselves
and for other people are changing because of all those supports and because, and I have no idea
what Instagram does. Well, I'll tell you. I wish I knew. I mean, I wish I could just have,
my remembering self could enjoy this conversation, but I'll get to enjoy it even more by having watched,
by watching it and then talking to others. It'll be about 100,000 people as scary as this to say,
well, listen or watch this, right? It changes things. It changes the experience of the world.
And then you seek out experiences which could be shared in that way. It's in, and I haven't seen,
it's, it's the same effects that you described. And I don't think the psychology of that
magnification has been described yet because it's in your world.
You know, the sharing, there was a, there was a time when people read books.
And, and, and you could assume that your friends had read the same books that you read. So there
was kind of invisible sharing. There was a lot of sharing going on. And there was a lot of assumed
common knowledge. And, you know, that was built in. I mean, it was obvious that you had read the
New York Times. It was obvious that you'd read the reviews. I mean, so a lot was taken for granted
that was shared. And, you know, when there were, when there were three television channels,
it was obvious that you'd seen one of them probably the same. So sharing, sharing has always been
there. Always was always there. It was just different. At the risk of inviting mockery from
you, let me say there that I'm also a fan of Sartre and Camus and existentialist philosophers.
And I'm joking, of course, about mockery, but from the perspective of the two selves,
what do you think of the existentialist philosophy of life? So trying to really emphasize the
experiencing self as the proper way to, or the best way to live life?
I don't know enough philosophy to answer that, but it's not, you know, the emphasis on
experience is also the emphasis in Buddhism. So that's, you just have got to experience things
and, and, and not to evaluate and not to pass judgment and not to score, not to keep score.
So if when you look at the grand picture of experience, you think there's something to that
that one, one of the ways to achieve contentment and maybe even happiness is letting go of any of
the things, any of the procedures of the remembering self. Well, yeah, I mean, I think, you know, if
one could imagine a life in which people don't score themselves, it, it feels as if that would
be a better life as if the self scoring and, you know, how am I doing a kind of question
is not, is not a very happy thing to have. But I got out of that field because I couldn't solve
that problem. And, and that was because my intuition was that the experiencing self, that's
reality. But then it turns out that what people want for themselves is not experiences, they want
memories and they want a good story about their life. And so you cannot have a theory of happiness
that doesn't correspond to what people want for themselves. And when I, when I realized that this,
this was where things were going, I really sort of left the field of research.
Do you think there's something instructive about this emphasis of reliving memories
in building AI systems? So currently, artificial intelligence systems are more like experiencing
self in that they react to the environment. There's some pattern formation like learning,
so on. But you really don't construct memories, except in reinforcement learning every once in
a while that you replay over and over. Yeah. But you know, that would in principle would not be
Do you think that's useful? Do you think it's a feature or a bug of human beings that we,
that we look back? Oh, I think that's definitely a feature. That's not a bug. I mean, you have to
look back in order to look forward. So without, without looking back, you couldn't, you couldn't
really intelligently look forward. You're looking for the echoes of the same kind of experience in
order to predict what the future holds. Yeah. Though Victor Franco in his book, Man's Search
for Meaning, I'm not sure if you've read, describes his experience at the concentration,
concentration camps during World War II as a way to describe that finding, identifying a purpose
in life, a positive purpose in life can save one from suffering. First of all, do you connect
with the philosophy that he describes there? Not really. I mean, so I can, I can really see
that somebody who has that feeling of purpose and meaning and so on, that that could sustain you.
I in general don't have that feeling. And I'm pretty sure that if I were in a concentration
camp, I'd give up and die, you know, so he talks, he's, he's a survivor. Yeah. And, you know, he
survived with that. And I'm, and I'm not sure how essential to survival the sense is, but I do know
when I think about myself that I would have given up at, oh, this isn't going anywhere.
And there is, there is a sort of character that, that, that manages to survive in conditions like
that. And then because they survive, they tell stories and it sounds as if they survive because
of what they were doing, we have no idea. They survive because of the kind of people that they
are and the other kind of people who survives and would tell themselves stories of a particular
of a particular kind. So I'm not. So you don't think seeking purpose is a significant
driver in our being? I mean, it's, it's a very interesting question because when you ask people
whether it's very important to have meaning in their life, they say, oh, yes, that's the most
important thing. But when you ask people, what kind of a day did you have? And, and, you know,
what were the experiences that you remember? You don't get much meaning. You get social
experiences. Then, and, and some people say that, for example, in, in, in child, you know,
in taking care of children, the fact that they are your children and you're taking care of them
makes a very big difference. I think that's entirely true. But it's more because of a story
that we're telling ourselves, which is a very different story when we're taking care of our
children or when we're taking care of other things. Jumping around a little bit in doing a
lot of experiments. Let me ask you a question. Most of the work I do, for example, is in the
in the real world, but most of the clean good science that you can do is in the lab. So that
distinction, do you think we can understand the fundamentals of human behavior through controlled
experiments in the lab? If we talk about pupil diameter, for example, it's much easier to do
when you can control lighting conditions. Yeah. So when we look at driving, lighting variation
destroys almost completely your ability to use pupil diameter. But in the lab, for as I mentioned,
semi autonomous or autonomous vehicles in driving simulators, we can't, we don't capture true,
honest human behavior in that particular domain. So your what's your intuition? How much of human
behavior can we study in this controlled environment of the lab? A lot, but you'd have to verify it,
you know, that your conclusions are basically limited to the situation, to the experimental
situation. Then you have to jump the big inductive leap to the real world. So and and that's the
flare. That's where the difference, I think, between the good psychologist and others that are
mediocre is in the sense that that your experiment captures something that's important and something
that's real and others are just running experiments. So what is that like the birth of an idea to his
development in your mind to something that leads to an experiment? Is that similar to maybe like
what Einstein or a good physicist do is your intuition? You basically use your intuition to
build up? Yeah, but I mean, you know, it's it's very skilled intuition. Right. I mean, I just had
that experience. Actually, I had an idea that turns out to be very good idea a couple of days ago.
And and you and you have a sense of that building up. So I'm working with a collaborator. And he
essentially was saying, you know, what what are you doing? What's what's going on? And I was
really, I couldn't exactly explain it. But I knew this is going somewhere. But, you know, I've been
around that game for a very long time. And so I can you develop that anticipation that, yes, this
this is worth following up something here. That's part of the skill. Is that something you can
reduce two words in describing a process in the form of advice to others? No,
follow your heart, essentially. I mean, you know, it's it's like trying to explain what it's like
to drive. It's not you've got to break it apart. And it's not and then you lose and then you lose
the experience. You mentioned collaboration. You've written about your collaboration with
Amos Tversky, that this is you writing the 12 or 13 years in which most of our work was joint
were years of interpersonal and intellectual bliss. Everything was interesting. Almost
everything was funny. And there was a current joy of seeing an idea take shape. So many times in
those years, we shared the magical experience of one of us saying something, which the other one
would understand more deeply than the speaker had done. Contrary to the old laws of information
theory, it was common for us to find that more information was received than had been sent.
I have almost never had the experience with anyone else. If you have not had it, you don't know
how marvelous collaboration can be. So let me ask a perhaps a silly question.
How does one find and create such a collaboration that may be asking like how does one find love?
But yeah, you have to be you have to be lucky. And and and I think you have to have the character
for that because I've had many collaborations. I mean, none with as exciting as with Amos
Tversky. But I've had and I'm having just very so it's a skill. I think I'm good at it.
Not everybody is good at it. And then it's the luck of finding people who are also good at it.
Is there advice in a form for a young scientist
who also seeks to violate this law of information theory?
I really think it's so much luck is involved. And you know, in in those
really serious collaborations, at least in my experience, are a very personal experience.
And I have to like the person I'm working with. Otherwise, you know, I mean, there is that kind
of collaboration, which is like an exchange or commercial exchange of I'm giving this,
you give me that. But the real ones are interpersonal. They're between people like
each other and and who like making each other think and who like the way that the other person
responds to your thoughts. You have to be lucky. Yeah, I mean, but I already noticed that even
just me showing up here, you've quickly started to digging in a particular problem I'm working on
and already new information started to emerge. Is that a process, just the process of curiosity,
of talking to people about problems and seeing? I'm curious about anything to do with AI and
robotics and, you know, and so and I knew you were dealing with that. So I was curious.
Just follow your curiosity. Jumping around on the psychology front, the dramatic sounding
terminology of replication crisis, but really just the at times,
this this effect at a time studies do not are not fully generalizable. They don't you are being
polite. It's worse than that. But is it so I'm actually not fully familiar. Well, I mean,
how bad it is, right? So what do you think is the source? Where do you think? I think I know
what's going on. Actually, I mean, I have a theory about what's going on. And what's going on
is that there is, first of all, a very important distinction between two types of experiments.
And one type is within subjects. So it's the same person has two experimental conditions.
And the other type is between subjects, where some people are this condition, other people
that condition, they're different worlds. And between subject experiments are much harder
to predict, and much harder to anticipate. And the reason, and they're also more expensive,
because you need more people. And it's just so between subject experiments is where the problem
is. It's not so much and within subject experiments, it's really between. And there is a very good
reason why the intuitions of researchers about between subject experiments are wrong.
And that's because when you are a researcher, you're in a within subject situation. That is,
you are imagining the two conditions and you see the causality and you feel it. But in the
between subjects condition, they don't think they see they live in one condition and the other one
is just nowhere. So our intuitions are very weak about between subject experiments. And that,
I think, is something that people haven't realized. And, and in addition, because of that, we have
no idea about the power of manipulations of experimental manipulations, because the same
manipulation is much more powerful when when you are in the two conditions than when you live in
only one condition. And so the experimenters have very poor intuitions about between subject
experiments. And, and there is something else, which is very important, I think, which is that
almost all psychological hypotheses are true. That is, in the sense that, you know, directionally,
if you have a hypothesis that a really causes B that that it's not true that a causes the opposite
B, maybe a just has very little effect, but hypotheses are true mostly, except mostly they're
very weak. They're much weaker than you think when you are having images of. So the reason I'm
excited about that is that I recently heard about some some friends of mine who they essentially
funded 53 studies of behavioral change by 20 different teams of people with a very precise
objective of changing the number of times that people go to the gym, but you know, and, and
the success rate was zero, not one of the 53 studies worked. Now what's interesting about that
is those are the best people in the field. And they have no idea what's going on. So they're not
calibrated. They think that it's going to be powerful because they can imagine it. But actually,
it's just weak because the you're focusing on on your manipulation and feels powerful to you.
There's a thing that I've written about that's called the focusing illusion. That is that when
you think about something, it looks very important, more important than it really is.
More important than it really is. But if you don't see that effect, the 53 studies,
doesn't that mean you just report that? So what's I guess the solution to that?
Well, I mean, the solution is for people to trust their intuitions less or to try out their intuitions
before. I mean, experiments have to be pre registered. And by the time you run an experiment,
you have to be committed to it. And you have to run the experiment seriously enough.
And in a public. And so this is happening. The interesting thing is
what what happens before? And how do people prepare themselves and how they run pilot
experiments? It's going to train the way psychology is done. And it's already happening.
Do you have a hope for this might connect to that this study sample size? Yeah.
Do you have a hope for the internet? Or this is really happening. M took
everybody's running experiments on M took. And it's very cheap and very effective.
So do you think that changes psychology, essentially, because you're think you cannot
run 10,000 subjects, eventually, it will. I mean, I, you know, I can't put my finger
on how exactly, but it's that's been true in psychology with whenever an important new method
came in, it changes the field. So an M took is really a method, because it makes it very
much easier to do something to do some things. Is there a undergrad students will ask me,
you know, how big and your own network should be for a particular problem? So let me ask you an
equivalent equivalent question. How big how many subjects that study have for it to have a
conclusive result? Well, it depends on the strength of the effect. So if you're studying
visual perception, or the perception of color, many of the other classic results in in visual
in color perception, we're done on three or four people. And I think in one of them was
colorblind, but partly colorblind. But on vision, you know, you know, many people don't need a lot
of replications for some type of neurological experiment. When you're studying weaker phenomena,
and especially when you're studying them between subjects, then you need a lot more subjects than
people have been running. And that is, that's one of the things that are happening in psychology.
Now is that the power is statistical power of experiment is is increasing rapidly.
Does the between subject as the number of subjects goes to infinity approach?
Well, I mean, you know, goes to infinity is exaggerated, but people the standard
number of subjects who are in experiment psychology with 30 or 40. And for a weak effect,
that's simply not enough. And you may need a couple of hundred. I mean, it's that that sort of
order of magnitude. What are the major disagreements in theories and effects that you've observed
throughout your career that still stand today? Well, you've worked on several fields. Yeah.
But I what still is out there as as a major disagreement that pops into your mind? And
I've had one extreme experience of, you know, controversy with somebody who really doesn't
like the work that Amos Tversky and I did. And and he's been after us for 30 years or more,
at least. Do you want to talk about it? Well, I mean, his name is Goetge Granzer. He's a well
known German psychologist. And that's the one controversy which I it's been unpleasant and
no, I don't particularly want to talk about it. But is there is there open questions, even in
your own mind, every once in a while, you know, we talked about semi autonomous vehicles in my
own mind, I see what the data says, but I also constantly torn. Do you have things where you
or your studies have found something, but you're also intellectually torn about what it means?
And there's been maybe disagreements without you within your own mind about particular thing.
I mean, it's, you know, one of the things that are interesting is how difficult it is for people
to change their mind. Essentially, you know, once they're committed, people just don't change their
mind about anything that matters. And that is surprisingly, but it's true about scientists.
So the controversy that I described, you know, that's been going on like 30 years,
and it's never going to be resolved. And you build a system and you live within that system,
and other systems of ideas look foreign to you. And there is very little contact and very little
mutual influence that happens a fair amount. Do you have a hopeful advice or message on that?
Thinking about science, thinking about politics, thinking about things that have impact on this
world. How can we change our mind? I think that, I mean, on things that matter,
you know, which are political or religious, and people just don't, don't change their mind.
And by and large, and there's very little that you can do about it.
The, what does happen is that if leaders change their mind, so for example,
the public, the American public doesn't really believe in climate change,
doesn't take it very seriously. But if some religious leaders decided this is a major
threat to humanity, that would have a big effect. So that we, we have the opinions that we have,
not because we know why we have them, but because we trust some people and we don't
trust other people. And so it's much less about evidence than it is about stories.
So the way, one way to change your mind isn't at the individual level, is that the leaders of
the communities, you look up with the stories change and therefore your mind changes with them.
So there's a guy named Alan Turing came up with a Turing test.
What do you think is a good test of intelligence? Perhaps we're drifting
in a topic that we're maybe philosophizing about, but what do you think is a good test
for intelligence, for an artificial intelligence system?
Well, the standard definition of, you know, of artificial general intelligence is that
it can do anything that people can do and it can do them better.
Yes.
And what we are seeing is that in many domains, you have domain specific and,
you know, devices or programs or software and they beat people easily in a specified way.
What we are very far from is that general ability, general purpose intelligence.
So we, in machine learning, people are approaching something more general.
I mean, for Alpha Zero was much more general than Alpha Go,
but it's still extraordinarily narrow and specific in what it can do.
So we're quite far from something that can in every domain think like a human
except better.
What aspect, so the Turing test has been criticized as natural language conversation
that is too simplistic. It's easy to quote unquote pass under constraints specified.
What aspect of conversation would impress you if you heard it? Is it humor?
What would impress the heck out of you if you saw it in conversation?
Yeah, I mean, certainly wit would be impressive and humor would be more impressive than just
factual conversation, which I think is easy and illusions would be interesting and
metaphors would be interesting. I mean, but new metaphors, not practiced metaphors.
So there is a lot that would be sort of impressive that it's completely natural in
conversation, but that you really wouldn't expect.
Does the possibility of creating a human level intelligence or super human level
intelligence system excite you, scare you?
Well, I mean, how does it make you feel?
I find the whole thing fascinating. Absolutely fascinating.
So exciting.
I think and exciting. It's also terrifying, you know, but I'm not going to be around to see it.
And so I'm curious about what is happening now, but also know that predictions about it are silly.
We really have no idea, but it will look like 30 years from now. No idea.
Speaking of silly bordering on the profound, they may ask the question of, in your view,
what is the meaning of it all, the meaning of life?
These descendant of great apes that we are, why, what drives us as a civilization, as a human being,
as a force behind everything that you've observed and studied?
Is there any answer or is it all just a beautiful mess?
There is no answer that that I can understand.
And I'm not, and I'm not actively looking for one.
Do you think an answer exists?
No, there is no answer that we can understand.
I'm not qualified to speak about what we cannot understand, but there is.
I know that we cannot understand reality.
I mean, there are a lot of things that we can do. I mean, gravity waves.
I mean, that's a big moment for humanity.
And when you imagine that ape being able to go back to the Big Bang, that's that.
But the why is bigger than us.
The why is hopeless, really.
Danny, thank you so much. It was an honor. Thank you for speaking today.
Thank you.
And now let me leave you with some words of wisdom from Daniel Kahneman.
Intelligence is not only the ability to reason,
it is also the ability to find relevant material in memory
and to deploy attention when needed.
Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.